Hey Mims, we've got something special
today. It's a bonus episode and we got a
guest who maybe is not traditional for
us, but I think is a bold name
nevertheless. H Bill Nye the Science
Guy. No, we got somebody from your neck
of the woods, celebrity chef Joseé
Andreas, who's going to talk to us about
what it's like to make food in outer
space, how he is doing things in the
diplomatic world, and his new book.
Incredible. Any friend of Martha
Stewarts is a friend of mine. That's
next.
Joseé Andre is a bold name in both
culinary and diplomatic circles.
The famous restaurant tour built an
empire from a tapest place in Washington
then pivoted to apply his culinary
skills to disaster zones. 15 years ago,
he founded World Central Kitchen, an
organization that rushes into chaos to
help feed survivors. Now, he has a new
book about his life called Change the
Recipe. And he tells us that he thinks
food is the cure for what ails us all.
We need leaders that believe in that,
that believe in longer tables, is so
simple to invest in peace, it's so
simple to invest in a better tomorrow.
Andreas says the kitchen is a good place
to learn how to deal with drama because
there's no shortage of unexpected
problems and last minute emergencies.
That's why restaurant business is so
good for getting not only chefs but
anybody in the restaurant world. Highly
adaptable creatures.
That's what the restaurant people are.
Highly adaptable creatures that do
amazing things sometimes in the middle
of chaos. He's not content to do the
same thing over and over. Andreas likes
to try new things. He's invested in
companies developing lab grown meat and
has worked on recipes for the
International Space Station.
So, the astronauts will be able not only
open a pack and and squeeze something
into their mouth, but actually be
cooking food that looks like real food.
From the Wall Street Journal, I'm Tim
Higgins. And I'm Christopher Mims. This
is Bold Names, where you'll hear from
the leaders of the bold- named companies
featured in the pages of the Wall Street
Journal. Today, we ask, how do Joseé
Andreas lessons from the kitchen shape
his approach to food policy and
large-scale disaster relief?
[Music]
Jose, welcome. Uh, sorry to interrupt
you. I I did we have to pull you away
from the beach in Spain?
Uh, well, uh, I'm near the beach. Uh,
but I'm not the beach guy. I'm uh
Yeah, you
you're not a beach guy because you're
always working.
Uh not always, but uh I don't think a
lot of things happen in the beach.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, I'm excited to talk to
you about your new book, Change the
Recipe. Um and let's just
This is a This is a serious
conversation.
Yeah. Well, it it won't stay serious.
It'll be serious if you're
start serious, though.
Yeah. You know, I think we we want to
start off a little serious because I'm
interested in kind of pulling some of
the the the management lessons out of
the book that I took away from it. And I
want to start off early in the book. You
write, "In the middle of dinner service
in a restaurant, the computer crashes or
the dishwasher breaks and need to roll
up your sleeves. After a hurricane or a
flood or in the middle of war, you
rarely have everything you want. Food
supplies are disrupted. Communications
may be down. kitchens may be destroyed.
That's when you change the recipe. And
I'm curious reading that what being a
restaurant tour for so many years with
your incredibly popular restaurants
first in the Washington DC area, now
around the US and and international.
What being a restaurant tour taught you
about crisis management?
Well, I don't know if it taught me
anything.
I mean obviously I I've written this
book and I I share some moments
but I I have a feeling like in in proper
education
when you go through
kindergarten and then first grade and
then high school and then university
in in the lessons of life is far way
more interesting in the university of
problem solving is a far way more
interesting ing moment of developing the
learning skills of everybody. Everybody
has them. Everybody has resolve an issue
in front of them, big or small. The
restaurant is full of those.
And you learn that one day you run out
of bread in the middle of service.
What What do you do? You close the
restaurant. You You tell everybody go.
You tell them it's no bread. Well, it's
not possible. It's a restaurant that is
popular for dunking the bread in the
sauce.
So you go and you send somebody in the
middle of service to the bakery you buy
from or any other bakery. Uh this seems
like very simplistic
but just think about it. Somebody has to
leave the restaurant to solve
that little problem in the scheme of
things. But that for that night, that
restaurant, that service may not be the
full good experience that every guest
should get. Multiply this by hundreds of
things may be happening. The computers,
the POS, the points of sale
that now restaurants and many other
businesses, we cannot operate without
them. And and in the old days was never
there like a book of what happens if the
computer crashes.
Managers myself, my fellow managers who
I remember working in the front of the
house in 1994, 1995, I did it because I
wanted to learn how to when that moment
happened already. The first day was
chaos.
The second day was less chaos. By the
third time, you kind of learn how to
adapt, but already you had kind of a
preset
possibilities and rules of engagement
because life experience
sometimes in the hard way, show you how
to adapt to a situation
that you never experienced before.
That's why restaurant business is so
good for getting not only chefs but
anybody in the restaurant world. Highly
adaptable creatures.
That's what the restaurant people are.
Highly adaptable creatures that do
amazing things sometimes in the middle
of chaos. Do you think that that is why
you've been able to transition so well
to the world central kitchen which
really is uh shown an ability to adapt
uh on the fly to address um natural
disasters, man-made disasters?
Does that explain how you've done so
well in that world?
So well central kitchen really was
something that was created in the in the
glimpse of of a moment in but obviously
some thinking happened many times before
when Katrina
destroyed parts of New Orleans and
right Louisiana.
Forget about the entire emergency FEMA
response and everybody else. Let's
concentrate on the super dome.
Sure. How did we leave 10 20,000 people
in the super dome for days without food,
water, functioning, bathrooms, things
happening to people inside the super
dome? You know, everybody thinks like a
a stadium or an arena is a gigantic
venue that
that their sole mission is entertaining
with sports
or music. actually I will argue is a
gigantic restaurant
that entertains with the sports and
music and and therefore if you are able
to pivot
all of the sudden that venue can become
the most powerful fitting place not only
for the people on that stadium but maybe
to do 100 200 300,000 meals out of that
amazing stadium.
So this is the way I began
thinking in my brain which is not it's
not a great idea. It's not a brilliant
idea. The only idea is let's feed
people. Let's not talk about doing it.
Let's just do it.
And and that's what you did 15 years ago
after the the earthquake uh in Haiti.
You just did it. You essentially
launched uh what would become the World
Central Kitchen. This organization now
has fed something like more than 450
million meals. Um has become uh a major
player in disaster recovery. I'm curious
in a world full of chaos and disasters.
How do you pick which one you personally
are going to be involved with?
Yeah. Well, we we done many much more
than than four 500 million. I mean, you
know, Ukraine alone is like 300 million.
uh uh Gasa alone is 100 130 140 million.
So the the number is much bigger.
So like a billion meals. I mean you're
feeding
is way is way bigger because also I
count personally the direct the indirect
influence sometimes we have in places
that even people that are not working
with us
they somehow go and they do it too. And
which ones I go? At the beginning, you
know, used to be me and who whatever
friend was gracious enough to come with
me. Uh the learning was Haiti.
Um um I landed in Dominican Republic. We
were able to cross through a beautiful
place called Malpas, the main
intersection between Dominican Republic
and Haiti.
uh thanks to a Spanish NGO that had uh a
long presence many years in Haiti and
they were taking care of few of the
camps that were created when thousands
died, hundreds of thousands lost their
home and I began cooking was no more
than that. But the the the longest story
short is that by start responding to
them. Uh the learning began
happening not by reading just by being
there and and by taking care of can we
take care of this camp? How many people?
Thousand. Hey, can you take care of this
other camp? 5,000 people. You talk about
how people often ask you, "How do you
feed so many people in your restaurants
or feed so many people in disasters?"
And you write, quote, "Complex problems
often have simple solutions." And
listening to you here, uh, it seems as
if the simple solution often is perhaps
food. It is a meal with each other. Is
that the takeaway?
Take a look at the Middle East, man.
Israel and Gaza, they love humus.
How people that love humus they they
they can have this situation. I had
people in Gaza,
mothers, woman making bread. Moments
that you had of of closeness that they
were telling you what Hamas did was
wrong.
I wouldn't anybody to do this to my
children. And I had Israelis that even
lost family members.
They say I would love to go to Gassa to
be next to the people to show them that
that we respect that we don't really
help them.
And this to me is very fascinating
because it's the reality. Maybe some
people call me naive.
The vast majority of the people are good
people that very often are not served
well by their leaders.
And the simple reality of recognizing
that many truths can be true at the same
time in the same phrase
that what happened on October 7 was
horrendous and was never supposed to
happen. And that's why Wendrai was there
next to the people in Israel feeding in
the kibuts from day one.
And that at the same time that I
defended obviously the right of Israel
to defend itself and to try to bring
back the hostages equally what is
happening in Gaza
is not supposed to be happening either.
One thing is going after Hamas other
thing is going against children and
civilians continuously.
You see all this truth can live all in
the same sentence
and we need leaders that believe in that
that believe in longer tables is so
simple to invest in peace is so simple
to invest in a better tomorrow. The only
reason we are not be able to be feeding
with a system that we created in the
middle of chaos where we lost seven
people in the effort of trying to bring
food. It's so simple to do good. It's so
simple to invest in a better tomorrow.
Food is the solution to many of the
issues we are facing. Let's hope that
food one day is just very soon tomorrow
is what gives hope that one day in the
Middle East it'll be people just
celebrating the cultures that sometimes
if you look at what they eat
they seem all to eat exactly the same. I
wonder one of the challenges and I think
that this is probably a lesson for other
folks is this is a massive supply chain
effort. How do you how do you set up in
an area that has been devastated and get
these foods and help the local economies
the way you do. It's it's got to be a
massive undertaking and you never know
where or when it's going to happen.
Well, I'm not going to be talking about
today because today
has amazing individual but I'm going to
tell you the early days.
Which this is something I personally
like to do. Even when you are scaling to
do you know like we reach half a million
meals a day in Gaza to do half a million
meals you you need warehouses.
You need a lot of drivers. You need an
amazing team that from ordering
to bring it to the warehouses to
distribution to crossing the border to
redistribute inside warehouses. The
logistics are beyond unbelievable.
But the essence is this one. when it's a
major event.
Obviously, we have teams right now that
will put the machine if we have an
assessment that we have to feed, you
know, bombas after Dorian category 5
80,000 people a day. It's a big number
and you're in islands food takes longer
to come to the island. So, you cannot
just order food for tomorrow. You have
to order food for tomorrow and the day
after and the week after because things
take time. But then if you make a order
that is too big depends what company
they collapse and if they collapse you
will not have food. You will have food
for today and tomorrow but not three
days from now. So you need to start the
system slowly but surely meaning you
don't wait until you have everything in
place. Before we went to meet the chefs,
when there was no communication, after
we landed in San Juan, Puerto Rico, what
is the first thing you do?
You go to the food warehouses.
It's always food warehouses somewhere.
Identify them. You cannot call because
cell signal is down. Electricity is
down. And you're going to have people
with frozen foods that without big
generators is not going to last long.
But food is somewhere. You only need to
find it. At the same time, you find the
chefs. It's always chefs. So once you
have the food, you identify the helpers.
You find the kitchens. What do you need?
Water. Somebody knows where to find
water. What do you need? Generators.
Somebody's going to help us with
generators and with the fuel. And you
start solving the problems. But that's
only the first part. The most important
thing central kitchen does because this
is what we do. Cooking for us is natural
but there is no humanitarian aid without
proper distribution. You cannot wait for
the people to come to you. We go to the
communities. We establish contact. It's
almost like a Star Trek. You know Star
Trek looking for new worlds.
you you make first contact
but but we make first contact that in
real time the communities tell us what
they need in terms of the quantity of
food and water but then once you have
the distribution system and the trust
all of the sudden they began asking you
for hey these three people here that
they have needs with a special
medication
can you get it more important is
scouting for the people that your help.
I love people of FEMA. I think they are
people that give their lives and and
they are away from families and
sometimes I think I think America we
need to be showing more love and respect
for FEMA. Myself, I complain about FEMA
back in the old days. Even to this day,
I will think that FEMA should be
improved, not not cut down, should be
improved because it's great experts at
FEMA that they know what to do. The
issue is that so much red tape, real red
tape, they are almost handcuffed from
making sometimes simple, smarter
decisions.
We reached out to the Israeli embassy in
Washington DC and to the Palestinian
Authority. neither responded.
When we come back, Andreas shares more
of his thoughts on FEMA, including his
worries about the nation's ability to
respond to disasters as the Trump
administration makes dramatic changes to
how FEMA operates.
I think FEMA has a very big PR and
marketing problem. I would love to help
them solve it.
Stay with us.
[Music]
There have been cuts to FEMA. I mean,
what do you think about all these cuts
that, you know, Doge and others are
making to the government organizations
which have been partners of yours?
Well, we work alongside FEMA. We've
never established more than that with
them. we go because
right but FEMA's capacity it seems like
is going to be significantly reduced in
the hurricane season to come.
I I hope President Trump will listen to
this podcast
because the simple message will be I
want to believe sincerely he loves
America. The way to love America
is not to be there when everything goes
well in a golf tournament or in a
baseball stadium or or visiting states
and announcing a new bill or a new
executive action.
But the the way to love America is to be
next to Americans
in the most difficult hours.
But to do a true organized
response system where in the process of
providing the short-term needs of the
people but doing it in a way that you
invest from the first day in the
reconstruction at the same time of those
communities. When you don't come with
that mindset, you go back to communities
that years ago were hit by hurricanes,
earthquakes, tornadoes, floodings,
and if you don't have a strong response
from the beginning, those communities
never go back to what they were. And
this is something that we can do better.
So, I hope that
to come and and shut down everything,
that's very easy. On the emergency side,
I hope that it'll be a major rethinking
that FEMA didn't have to be cut
completely or huge cuts, but that FEMA
what had to do was let's make it the
less political possible cannot be
political. You cannot say that when you
are in power, the response is great, but
when you are not in power, the response
is not great. It's not true. Uh,
everybody is equally as good, everybody
is equally as bad. But we need a FEMA
that is organized. And the best people
to do it are the men and women from
FEMA's the EOCC's of every state.
Florida has great ones, California has
great ones. and listen to the people
that know and give them the tools to do
a very good response because this
hurricane season is coming and I'm very
worried that the federal government is
not going to be answering in the same
way we used to. And still when we
complain when everything was in place we
complained like FEMA is never here. I
think FEMA has a very big PR and
marketing problem. I would love to help
them solve it. I can tell you the things
that FEMA can improve on, but the people
of FEMA can tell you too. What we need
to do is get that expertise of the
people that know and make sure we listen
to them and make the the FEMA that
America deserves.
So So the US is not prepared for
hurricane season.
Well, I I I didn't say that.
Why I'm asking?
I didn't say that. It's been it's been
memos inside
Yeah. government uh by experts uh saying
that they don't feel FEMA is prepared.
It takes long time to prepare because
it's is is not money, it's assets. It's
it's the people that make things happen
is knowing how to call.
You know, it's it's interesting. We've
heard from the statesmen
uh now. Um and I'm just curious how you
think about using your celebrity. Um, is
it for your business brands or is it to
bring attention to these social issues
that you so clearly feel passionate
about and have really kind of given you
a second arc to your career in a lot of
ways, right? You've pulled back from
being the CEO of your restaurant group a
year ago to focus more on your other
opportunities, whether it's in the media
or um your volunteer work.
I I'm I'm only trying to to see what
what I I I can occupy the best space
that I feel helpful
that I feel I can contribute. Even only
being a whisperer, I like to whisper. I
I love to lead from the front when I
feel I have to. I don't mind to lead
from the back either. Foot is at the
heart in essence of all of these. So
again, it's a is experts out there.
That's why I created the the the global
food institute at George Washington and
I thought let me bring this issue as
closer as I I can to power only to be
saying can we make sure that food is
part of the presidential debates. Can we
make sure that food is part of bills
that are beyond the farm bill? Food is
not only the department of agriculture.
Food is way bigger than the department
of agriculture. Food is immigration.
Food is national security. Food science,
food is culture, food is food is the
economy. If if you think about it, food
is commerce, food is urban and housing
development.
So we can be buying from poor rural
communities in America to fit the school
systems. The department of education
needs to be part of. We need to be
opening markets where there is no
private sector investing because they
don't think they can make money. The
government should be there for that to
cover that need. making sure that the
poor families have access to the same
food, fruits, and vegetables that you
and I have.
When I think about this World Food
Institute, when I think about World
Kitchen,
uh but I think about your other efforts,
too, which which seem disconnected,
right? Like your television show with uh
Martha Stewart. Yes, chef. which which I
I have to say I enjoyed and and I'm very
jealous that you got to sit alongside uh
Martha tasting all that food. Um but the
unexpected connection to me is that
these are all humanitarian efforts where
you're trying to get people to get
along. It's really funny because it's a
reality show, but it's actually very
high concept. You have people who are
nominated because they have some issue
in the kitchen, anger issues, control
issues, and you're forcing them to get
along. So, in a funny way, it's a
microcosm of what you just advocated for
America's foreign policy where you're
taking all these people with these
different interests and you're forcing
them to collaborate or else, right? Um I
do you see it that way? Is is it is this
all sort of an extension of your
humanitarian impulse?
Well, I I I could do. Number one, I
still see myself as a cook. That's I'm
not even a chef. A chef is somebody that
actually runs the kitchen very
efficiently every day. A cook is a guy
that goes to the market and can feed
anybody. I'm a cook. Uh I have great
chefs next to me.
Cook doesn't have the same ring as a
show name, though.
Well, true. But but that's why we call
chef. Accents are important.
Communication is important. Building
longer tables is important. And we are
all in the business of learning. In the
show, you see me say more than once, I
raise my hand to I've been there. You
try to learn. You try to to to say
sorry. You try to apologize. And you try
to make sure never happens again. But
sometimes happens even you try to become
the best version of yourself. This show
was a way for me with Martha with her
life experience to say we are all one.
We the people. We are all together. We
made the effort to say it's going to be
more than a TV competition. We're going
to be recognizing that we all have flaws
and that we recognize them and we have
each other's back. We can go through
them and become the best angels within
ourselves.
We reached out to FEMA and its press
office quote politely declined Andre's
offer to help them with their PR. A
White House spokeswoman said, quote,
"President Trump is a relentless fighter
for the American people." End quote. And
that he is working with the state and
local governments to invest in their own
resilience. We just heard how Andre
wants to build longer tables. Next, he
talks to us about the future of food,
whether it's grown in a lab or cooked in
outer space.
Let's make sure that we are able to
produce enough food
uh to feed humanity. And I will always
be on the side of of people that are in
the edges of trying to to find the next
the next thing
that's next.
[Music]
This is for an editor of mine who's a
fan of yours who's writing about uh lab
grown meat. He wanted me to ask you, do
you think lab grown meat can close the
protein gap
in countries around the world and and or
have other positive impacts?
So, obviously, one of the companies I'm
on the board and they hire me to be next
to them, which is great because I'm not
going to be doing something because I
get paid.
Okay. But you're talking about the lab
grown chicken made by Good Meat that
you're a partner with, right?
Yeah. But but I'm I invested in I'm an
investor and probably I lose the money
or maybe not but I in the one making
salmon
one that is made in Israel which is
salmon uh outside Jerusalem and they are
producing salmon made out of vegetables
salmon like it's amazing at the end of
the day I buy the best chicken available
I buy the best beef available but I'm
always going to be on the side of we're
going to be 89 billion even indication
says says that we're going to pick at
10, 11, a billion and then we're going
to start going down. But let's make sure
that we are able to produce enough food
to feed humanity. And I will always be
on the side of of people that are in the
edges of trying to to find the next the
next thing.
The food talk is fascinating when you go
beyond what is on the surface.
Yeah.
Two years ago, I was able to send food.
I mean others have done it before but I
was very involved in moving forward this
kind of even newer and newer way better
quality food to the space station and I
serve pa Valenciana which for me was
like okay
we serve a Spanish dion the space
station
but now the last two years we've been
working with this kitchen uh this guy
Jim Sears he gave me the two prototypes
he created after he won a kind of a NASA
competition so two years we've been
working with those kitchens creating in
gravity zero food.
Huh.
So one day when astronauts spend a long
time in the ISS, the trip to the moon,
staying in the moon or the trip to Mars
which will take with the technology we
have right now three years
cooking will occupy the space of those
people. So those will be the kitchens
that will be used
without a doubt in gravity zero. So the
astronauts will be able not only open a
pack and and and squeeze something into
their mouth, but actually be cooking
food that looks like real food.
Yeah, because it's like they're send a
lot of taco Taco Bell shells up there is
what I read.
Taco shells are complicated though
because they crumble and create a lot of
little particles. the taco shell you
have here on planet earth will be amaz
but we made it so by the book trying to
be a a rice like in Spain
that the grains are not very moist
they are more on the dry side so every
is
so when they open the back all the
grains were floating
uh so I almost collapsed the the the
space station with my pa
But anyway, I I think the astronauts had
a great time just catching every grain
of rice, you know.
Yeah. Well, it probably tasted good.
Awesome. Thank you for your time, Jose.
Fascinating. Until we meet again.
Yeah. Thank you, guys.
And that's bold names. Our producer is
Danny Lewis. Michael Lval and Jessica
Fenton are our sound designers. Jessica
also wrote our theme music. Our
supervising producer is Katherine
Milsop. Our development producer is
Aisha Al-Muslim.
Scott Saloway and Chris Sinsley are the
deputy editors and Fana Patterson is the
Wall Street Journal's head of news
audio. For even more, check out our
columns on wsj.com.
We've linked them in the show notes.
I'm Tim Higgins and I'm Christopher
Mims. Thanks for listening.
[Music]